@ARTICLE {,
    month = "may",
    note  = "The Orthodox Church and the preservation of the ecological balance of the population in Russia


Ershov Bogdan Anatolievich, Fursov Vladimir Nikolaevich

Voronezh State Technical University, Moskovsky Prospect, 14, Voronezh, Russia, 
E-mail:  bogdan.ershov@yandex.ru, 8-919-243-06-34
Voronezh State Pedagogical University, Lenin street, 86, Voronezh, Russia


ABSTRACT:

The article analyzes ecological problems associated with religion and faith, which is especially noticeable among the inhabitants of megacities.  It is shown that in order to preserve nature, it is necessary to include environmental education in the priority tasks of universal education.  Particular attention is drawn to different approaches to environmental problems.


KEYWORDS: ecology, state, church, population, pollution. 



I. INTRODUCTION

The urgency of environmental problems creates the need to create an ecological culture for all segments of the population.  The location of people to adopt norms of environmental ethics depends on many factors, including.  and from religious beliefs.  In the 20th century, the influence of Christianity on the attitude of people towards nature was actively discussed abroad.  About the protection of nature (at least until the 80-ies.) Spoke relatively little.  However, during the Perestroika of the late 1980s.  interest in environmental issues has become massive, and the number of believers has increased.  
For the preservation of nature, it is necessary to include environmental education in the priority tasks of universal education, but not enough, it is important to use a variety of channels for the dissemination of environmental moral values: such as the media, public organizations, and additional education.  On the other hand, in Russia, in addition to environmental problems, the current problem of lack of religious tolerance, tension in interreligious relations and xenophobia is also very topical.  Formation of the same ecological culture (as well as other ethical issues) can become the subject of inter-confessional dialogue.  This makes the question of assessing and studying the influence of religious beliefs in relation to nature relevant.


II. METHODOLOGY


This research is based on primary sources and field materials (the results of included observation, interviewing and questioning), for the analysis of which a cross-cultural, cross-confessional comparative analysis method and other methods were used to identify both general and confessional features of the attitude towards nature  Christians of different faiths.  The principle position in the implementation of this study is noninterference in interconfessional discussions on the truth or falsity of certain religious dogmas.  
Recognition by some and non-recognition by other Christians of certain doctrines and practices is perceived in the work as a given without attempting their theological justification or refutation.  At the same time, when analyzing various modern ideas (especially those emanating from secular researchers), the conformity or inconsistency of such ideas to traditional Christian doctrines and concepts is assessed.  The confessions in this study are understood as the aggregate of religious communities united by the identity of the doctrine and spiritual practice and often having common governing bodies.


III. RESULTS

This study should be recognized as the initial stage in the study of the development of Christian understanding of environmental problems and the attitude of Christians towards nature.  It is obvious that the role of Christian faiths in shaping the ecological culture of the population of Russia will change.  Having considered different views on this problem, it is necessary to note the diversity of positions of various researchers, sometimes opposing each other.  In many respects this is due to the fact that the attitude of Christianity and Christians towards nature is studied in the most diverse, as a rule, interdisciplinary, scientific directions, among which ecological theology stands out.  
The influence of Christian beliefs on the formation of an ecological culture of believers deserves a long and comprehensive study.  In the study of this problem, a combination of several complementary methodological approaches is needed: the analysis of canonical works and modern official documents reflecting the positions of churches;  the study of the attitude towards the nature of modern believers, as well as the establishment of the relationship between the understanding of nature in the original sources and in the consciousness of modern Christians.  The relationship between man and nature is repeatedly touched upon both in the Bible and in later sources.  
The discussion of this topic from the point of view of the canonical text and, conversely, the interpretation of the text as applied to environmental problems in recent years is found in the works of many theologians, philosophers and clergymen.  This allows us not only to talk about the development of a new theological discipline - ecotheology, but also to distinguish two different approaches within this discipline: the transformational one, which seeks to revise Christian doctrines and adaptive, defending the dogma of dogma, but trying to adapt them to the condition of an ecological crisis.  The latter approach in Russia is more acceptable and can be traced in the social doctrines of Christian confessions.


IV. DISCUSSION

The first attempts to assess the influence of Christian beliefs on attitude toward nature began to be made in the USA in the 1950s and the 1960s, when theologian E. Rust showed the biblical understanding of nature (1953), while the historian White wrote an article where environmental problems were associated with the spread of the Christian worldview  (1967), and Christianity was criticized for anthropocentrism.  In the 1960-1970's.  Also in the United States, due to the work of Christian theologians J. Sittler, R. Baer, F. Joransen, J. Cobb, C. Kofen, E. Linsy, ecological theology is developing.  The history of the formation of this discipline abroad was described by the American ecologist R. Nash.  In general, the Christian attitude to nature and environmental problems was mainly studied either by theologians far from the ecology, or by secular experts (ecologists, philosophers, historians), far from Christianity.  
Therefore, many works on this topic were somewhat unilateral, and sometimes apologetic.  In the USSR, this polemic remained almost unheeded even in scientific circles, except for the works of L.I.  Vasilenko (1983), and somewhat later A.A.  Velika and A.S.  Popova (1990).  As for theologians and clergymen, they spoke on this subject in the Soviet Union.  In Russia, on the problem of \"Christianity and ecology\", various books were written by authoritative specialists such as NN Moiseev, LI Vasilenko, VP Gaidenko, VI Kurashov, NK Gavryushin, L.  I. Vasilenko, T. Goryacheva). 

V. CONCLUSION

As in the whole of Russian society, the technocraticization of the consciousness of Christians reduces their receptivity to environmental moral values, which is especially noticeable among the inhabitants of megacities and can be, at least in part, compensated by the content of domestic animals and nature hikes.  The latter is practiced by Christians quite widely and often with spiritual goals (knowledge of God through \"viewing creations\").  Clergymen of different Christian faiths, as a rule, show great disposition towards the adoption of environmental moral values, than \"ordinary\" parishioners.  
From the point of view of the role of Christianity in the ecological education of the younger generation, the most promising form of Christian spiritual and moral education is working with children, adolescents and youth in nature (in the conditions of a hike or field camp).  The component of ecological education organically fits into the program of such events, which is confirmed by the pedagogical achievements of associations of Christian scout organizations: the Brotherhood of Orthodox Pathfinders (BPS), the clubs of the \"Pathfinders\".

REFERENCES


Boreyko V.E. Popular dictionary on environmental ethics and humanitarian ecology Kyiv: KECC, 2003. 96 p.
Borodina A.V. Fundamentals of Orthodox Culture: We and our culture. 1 class. A handbook for teachers. - Moscow: The Basics of Orthodox Culture, 2005. 176 p.
Desnitsky A.S. Is the book of the prophet Jonah an old tale? // \"The World of the Bible\" - M., 1997 №4. Pp. 58-62.
Ermolin A. Navigator of the third millennium, or How to become a scout. M .: People's Education, 2004. 425 p.
Karev A.V. Treasures of a Christian // Bratsky Herald No. 5, 1974. S. 28-40.
Kozlov VI, Yamskov AN Ethnic ecology // Ethnology in the USA and Canada. Otv. Edited by: Veselkin EA, Tishkov VA M .: Nauka, 1989. P. 86-107.
Krotov Ya. Ecology and Christianity in the historical perspective of book. \"Ecotheology: the voices of the North and the South\" - M., 1997. P. 207-214.
Likhachev DS Ecology of Culture // Moscow, №. 7, 1979. pp. 173-179.
Medvedev V.I., Aldasheva A.A. Ecological consciousness: a textbook. Ed. second, add. Moscow: Logos, 2001. - 384 p.
Moiseyev N.N. The world of the XXI century and the Christian tradition. Report for the Congress \"Two Millennium of Christianity\" (Rome, July 1993) // N.N. Moiseev Ecology and education. M: \"UNISAM\", 1996. P. 167-190.
Nurulaev AA The concept of sustainable development: the role of religious organizations in its implementation, \"Ecology and Religion\", Moscow, RAU, 1994. P. 242-248.
Ogudin V.L. Ecological function of religion. // Ethnographic Review. -M .: 2001. №1. Pp. 23-38.
Panov V.I. Actual problems of ecological psychology // Psychology today. T. 2. Issue. 1. M .: 1996. P. 102-103.
Puchkov P.I. On the classification of religions // Ethnos and religion. - Moscow: Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 1998. P. 7-23.
Khribar SF The Bible on the relationship of man with nature and God // Ecology and Life, 1997, № 4 1998, № 1. Pp. 11-16.
Khribar SF Ecological problem and ecological education in the biblical tradition // IV International conference on ecological education \"Strategy of ecological education and upbringing in the XXI century\". Moscow: MNEPU, 2000. P. 292-294.
Yasvin V.A. History and psychology of the formation of ecological culture (Conveniently sits at the top of the pyramid?) M .: Nauka, 1999. - 100 p."
}
